I have been terrified of death my whole
life. I still am so afraid.
[music]
Khloe Xiao is an anomaly. She's one of
cinema's most distinctive and
distinguished directors, making films
that are strikingly original and full of
artistic risk-taking in an era when
Hollywood is increasingly risk averse.
Her latest film, Hamnet, is up for
several Academy Awards, including best
director and best picture. And it's
already won two Golden Globes where
Xiao's acceptance speech for best drama
was an ode to vulnerability.
>> The most important thing of being an
artist is learning to be vulnerable
enough to allow oursel to be seen.
>> Xiao's characters are often painfully
vulnerable.
>> Are you married?
>> I am, but my husband died.
They're wounded misfits
and soulsearching outsiders confronting
deep personal loss like in [music]
Hamnet an adaptation of Maggie O
Farerrell's historical novel about the
death of Shakespeare's young son as seen
through the eyes of his wife Anas.
>> I see you in London working with your
father.
>> Xiao herself is an enigmatic
[clears throat] presence hardly the sort
of hot shot personality we often
associate with big-time Hollywood
directors. [music]
And yet, she's reached the pinnacle of
an industry still dominated by mostly
[music] white men. Here's my
conversation with Khloe Xiao.
[music]
>> Chloe, thank you for taking the time to
come speak with us today. I appreciate
it.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> Yeah. Um, so I want to start with a an
award season question.
>> Your eyes just got glazed over a little.
I'm sorry. [laughter]
>> No, it's excitement.
>> Yeah. Yeah, that was a look of
excitement. Yeah. um
>> the animal in the jungle.
>> There's obviously a lot of um award
season buzz around Hamnet and by the
time this interview comes out, we'll
know what nominations the film did or
didn't get. But but right now the thing
that I'm curious about is sort of what
like the whole awards rigomearroll stirs
up for you because I imagine it could
involve feelings like uh of envy or or
competition or it involves salesmanship
or or gladanding which I feel like are
not necessarily the kinds of feelings or
ideas that are interesting to you or
come naturally to you. So, how do you
deal with this moment?
>> I I love that that's almost like a a
form of compliment you just did.
[laughter and gasps] You think of me a
lot more highly than
>> maybe you like doing it. I don't know.
>> But I think the all those quite um basic
emotions, none of us can escape it. And
especially artists, so many of us,
majority of us of us started telling
stories because we didn't have the
easiest childhood, right? So when your
work right which is the only way that
you can seek connection and validations
since you're a little child is being
compared
and um judged. You could go as far as
feeling a rejection of that is a
rejection of who you are and whe your
ability to belong to a tribe or be safe
or be loved. you could go that far and
it does go that far to me at times but
what I like about it I don't know if if
if people know is that film making is
quite of a lonely
process at least speaking as director
um you go you're like a ronin you know
you're like a a samurai
>> a wandering samurai
>> yeah you're getting hired to do jobs and
jobs and jobs and then you create this
family and then you have to leave again
so a worse season, especially if someone
like me who came up from independent
films and having to go festivals and
labs after labs to even get money to
grants and to make my first film, I was
exposed to a lot of my fellow filmmakers
over a decade ago. So to be paid
[laughter and gasps] to be brought
together and to see each other and to
hang out at these, you know, events and
and roundts and stuff is actually really
nice. I try to ask them to let me come
to their set and just shadow people. I
think there should be a system where
directors get to be on each other's set,
you know, because we never otherwise how
do we keep learning? What do you think
someone could learn from watching you
work?
>> How to embrace chaos.
Pretty much Hamnet was created that way.
For example, when Hamnet died, spoiler
alert. [laughter and snorts]
Don't think you can spoil this one.
>> And
>> it's a historical fact.
>> Yeah. Someone died, someone wrote a
play. Um, Hamna died. And on that day,
Jesse and I would not talk about, we
don't really talk about the scene coming
in. She would in the morning, she would
do a lot of fever writing about her
dreams and then she would pick some
music. And so, as soon as I get to set,
I I will just put the music on repeat.
So, the whole set sort of get harmonized
to the vibration she wants to be
vibrating in. and
we just go we just other than a
conversation about which which setup we
want to do, we just go in there and do
it. And so when she let out that very
gachal scream of grief, um that was not
something that was planned from me nor
her. But I do believe it didn't just
come from her, it came from the
collective, the village. And and when
that happens, I can feel I can feel it
and it's the most exciting thing for me
as a director because I go, there's no
way any of us could have thought of that
and because that is truth happen in the
moment and I will bottle that up and
I'll defend it in the edit and I'll make
sure it goes into the world. You know,
it's so interesting to hear you talk
about um sort of the uh practicalities
of directing for you because um you
know, often when I've uh heard other
directors talk or or read about other
directors, there's um
>> there's sort of recurring uh images or
tropes of of how a director behaves that
are, you know, it's like I I want to say
I want to say France it's Francis Ford
uh Copela who said this. I I could be
wrong, but he he compared being a
director to like being a ring master of
a circus that's inventing itself every
day. Or sometimes you hear um directors
uh you sort of compared with uh generals
or something like that. And and these
are all sort of very um like to my mind
kind of like alpha uh aggressive uh
macho metaphors for how what for the job
of directing on too
>> and but it's so not what you're
describing and I I just wonder if if you
could talk a little bit about how you
handle sort of the the the necessary
leadership aspects of being a director
and making a movie. You know, I like I
like thinking about myth. If you think
about in myth and in in in archetypes,
what what are the types that can lead?
>> Yeah.
>> Traditionally, yes, you have a general,
but you also have a priestess.
Both can evoke the desire for people to
get excited to follow their vision.
doesn't mean that the example you give
of what Francis you know said that he is
that then I'm this both of these two
archetypes is within ourselves.
So there is a general inside of me but
there's also a priestess inside of me.
It's just depends on the scene. It
depends on the film and
some filmmaker have a bit more priestess
energy in them than generals but both
can lead and both are needed.
>> If you only have the priestess is total
chaos black hole.
>> Yeah. If you only have the general is
total order and just one beam of light
and nothing else. And but I like to be
in those two extreme polarities as
opposed to constantly kind of have my
hands in everything, controlling
everything, but also not fully
controlling everything.
>> No, I like to be total surrender and
then total control.
>> Um I I have kind of a historically
inclined uh question for you. Um uh so
you know in uh Shakespeare's time the
time period in which Hamnit is set
>> um
>> you know the the death of a child was a
much more common occurrence
>> than it is now at least in in uh
>> oh rich western countries. Um,
>> and I assume that as a result of that,
um, people just had very had a different
perspective on what it meant to lose a
child or different, uh,
>> feelings or or expectations
>> and and
>> I'm just curious if if that's something
you or how you thought about that with
your film and and if you think it's
possible to sort of recreate
older emotional perspectives.
>> That's a really good question. I think
about that all the time. Maggie said
that she doesn't believe
it's possible that the grief is any
less.
>> Uh Maggie O Farerrell, the author,
>> the author. Yeah. She said that to me
from the start and I I tend to agree
with her because even though we're
things are so different, but our biology
hasn't changed and the design that we
have to want to protect a child
would not change. However,
the stories we attach to that pain
which is suffering might be different
because they also have a different love
relationship with the unseen back there.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> Right. You know, I recently trained um
to be a death doula
>> really
>> in the UK. Um just I just finished level
one training, foundational training and
in one of the training sessions we had
to um research indigenous cultures from
around the world how they deal with
death and dying both today and also in
the past. And you can see that the grief
of losing a loved one doesn't change.
Right? However, the societal
understanding of what death is and what
the and the space it gives to grief and
the ceremonies and and and how is how
how it's um embedded in the culture has
shifted so much and the medicalization
of death,
>> right? And also in the modern world when
death is no longer seen as a natural
part of uh life because now it's about
saving staying alive as as long as we c
as we can. There's almost some kind of
shame around death.
>> Yeah.
>> Because it's weak or something or it
shouldn't happen.
>> So there's so much of that starting
being attached to death and dying that
actually cause suffering that's not
natural to the human condition. So, I
think that's different.
>> Um, I want to rip up all my questions
and ask you more about wanting to be a
death da.
>> We have another session in the future.
>> Um, why are you interested in becoming a
death doula?
>> Um,
[sighs]
because I have been terrified of death
my whole life. I still am so afraid. And
because I've been so afraid, I haven't
been able to live fully. I haven't been
able to love with my heart open because
I'm so scared of losing love, which is a
form of death. So, when you're in your
40s and you kind of go, which is great,
by the way, midlife crisis is the best
thing that can happen to you because
what it does is is you're on your way to
a rebirth.
You can't run from this feeling. Your
body is changing and and you can feel
death. And I because I'm so scared of
it, I have no choice but to start to
develop a healthier relationship with it
or I'm not going to make I'm not going
to make it. The second half of life
would be too hard.
>> So it's a it's a way of facing your
fear. is a way of understanding because
making hamnet helped me understand that
I just know there is another way. I just
have a feeling that
whoever designed this
have decided that you will be born and
then die. You will love deeply but then
lose love. It's almost like a cosmic
joke. We're the only one in this na in
nature that have a problem with that
process.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And so but we
>> we're aware of awareness in a way that
no
>> we we must be designed to know how to
die. It shouldn't be this terrifying
that I can't even live. That must be not
the intention.
>> Well, it's not this terrifying to
everyone.
>> I hope not. But but I just I do know
that a lot of the issues we have in the
world comes from ultimately that deep
fear of death.
>> Are are you a afraid of your own
non-existence? Are you afraid of the
pain of death?
>> I think it's impermanence.
>> Yeah.
>> You know the impermanence. So in Hamlet,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> It there's a line that goes all living
things must die passing through nature
to eternity. If in your life eternity
doesn't exist, right? Because you didn't
grow up with spirituality or religion.
So the eternity part is out. You also
lost your connection with nature, even
your own body, your own body wisdom.
Then passing through nature part of that
sentence is gone. All you have left is
all living things must die. That's no
fun, you know. And that's like wait,
well then what's the point, you know?
So, so, so you're sort of separating
separated from the oneness.
But for me, I feel separated often from
that oneness. And that illusion of
separation makes me afraid to connect,
makes me afraid to create freely or even
just live in the way I want to live.
>> You you uh alluded to a a midlife
crisis. Do is that something you're
currently experiencing or
>> I'm at the I'm kind of at the
[snorts] So if if it's if it's four
seasons, I'm at the
end of winter, beginning of spring, I
like I'm coming back up.
>> Ah,
>> so so so actually a better metaphor. I I
like metaphor speaking of metaphor
because it makes more sense to me. um in
the cryis period
I have passed the deepest part of the
decomposing from the caterpillar let's
put it that way which was extremely
uncomfortable about a year and a half of
just sitting there having every part of
who you used to be grinded down.
>> Yeah. What can you tell me what did that
look like for you? It looks like cannot
getting out of getting out of bed is
hard, you know, being interested in
anything. Um,
just getting through the day because
everything that I used to use to
distract myself or everything that I
thought is what I wanted in life and
everything will be fine if I get them or
everything that I uh thought is who I
was
no longer is. So, I'm sort of at the end
of that
>> and by the way was what saved me in many
ways to have that film during that time.
>> Um, and you said you you struggled to uh
connect with people, struggled to feel
love. Um,
that's very sad. How did how did
>> you have no struggle? I mean, I I have
tons of struggles in my life, but when
you talk about um not feeling like are
you talking about having problems with
uh feeling love in relationships with
your family? I'm just want to know more
about what
>> you know about that.
>> If you're terrified of being abandoned,
>> yeah,
>> right? Cast out the tribe. then you
don't make an effort to belong or truly
love from a place of vulnerability and
trust, right? Um,
and that's really sad because we I don't
think we're designed to be alone to to
do it alone. were designed as like uh
like wolves, you know, like like pack
people and tribe.
>> But the but once you belong and to be
cast out your tribe, it's the most
painful thing you can experience. Or or
to be abandoned by people that you know
that you love and that that love you
doesn't even mean intentionally. Yeah.
You know, someday could die.
>> Um can I take a stab at something? You
tell me.
>> Yeah. I I I can discern [laughter]
you.
>> I know my publicist will come in and
throw a bottle at you, one or the other.
>> Um, you know, when you talk about being
cast out of the cast out of your tribe
or
>> I'm discerning.
>> You're discerning?
>> Yeah.
>> Um, well, what do you mean?
>> I know what you're going to say.
>> I'm going to ask about uh family stuff.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Yeah. Um, you grew up in China and then
moved to
>> the United States when you were 14.
>> No, actually I moved to the UK first.
first.
>> Yeah.
>> Was there some sort of familial
separation there that's related to sort
of the casting out you're talking about?
>> I can't really go into it. Um, but I
will answer it
the best I can. is [clears throat] that
it is an investigation I have been doing
the last four years of where does that
come from you know and I think it's a
lot older than
I feel like even in this life
>> huh
>> I really [clears throat] do you know you
started by asking me about a worst
season [laughter]
>> right
>> that feels like a long time ago
>> but it's relevant because what where
what is this fear of failing
>> what is this fear when my film you know
gets rejected by the critics. What is
this feeling if the box office is terri
you know what if I lose every you know
what is you you you is I look around at
an awards show right and I look at the
tables and then when the winner is
announced and I look at the faces of the
people who didn't win
>> and I try to feel like what are they
feeling
>> and at best it's like that person must
had an easier childhood at worst it's
like I don't belong
me, I might as well just die.
>> Do you think people sitting around the
tables at at award shows are are having
that feeling?
>> I think there's a few probably and and
probably more than that.
>> Yeah.
>> Because then, you know, what if work is
your sense of belonging, you know? What
if you feel like you don't belong
anywhere but with your family? Then what
if your family is gone?
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So any kind of belonging it makes
me realize any kind of belonging
has a risk of
being cast out. And then you have to ask
this. You might roll, you know, people
might roll their eyes when when when I
say when I say this, but
that kind of home, the one that cannot
be taken away
is the one within. And it's the and is
the one that you connect with the divine
with this great mystery that we you have
different different culture have
different word for it and the the earth
below us, right? that cannot go away and
if you do a a ceremony or a plant
medicine you feel that that wness and
you have no fear in those moments right
that's why you know warriors would take
medicine before they go
>> have you done Iawaska ceremonies
>> uh no comment no I have not done a
ceremony I have experience facilitated
uh plant medicine uh healing journeys
>> by my therapist right And I've
experienced that kind of oneness that
when when all the stuff goes away, you
you really do feel like you're one with
everything and truly no fear, you know,
and and so
I think the bigger question I I you know
to to to to answer your question about
did it happen when I left China to go to
school, you know, or did it happen when
a film of mine didn't work out or did it
happen when Yeah. I'm trying to locate
the the source of the feeling that
you're talking about.
>> And that is
I tried that for many many years because
we have to understand why.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. We must know cuz that's how we
feel safe. We must understand why this
thing happened.
But I sort of got to a point where I I
realized that even the need to
understand where it came from is a form
of control and it's a it's a form of
fear. And I let that go a little bit and
now it's more about can I sit in that?
And and and it maybe that is the great
paradox of what it means to be human.
you know it is to constantly hold that
tension of to be or not to be
>> to [clears throat] love or to be
abandoned.
>> This is a long way for me to avoid your
question because I think there this
could be interpreted very
simplistically.
>> Um
if I were to try to pinpoint one moment
in my life that this made me and I think
we try to look at trauma that way is
that
>> because once you pinpoint it then you
can fix it. for this is not like that.
>> Um,
>> sorry I'm not giving you all your
>> That's okay. [laughter]
>> I was also just thinking you brought up
the to be or not to be the stupid
thought in my head was like oh that
William Shakespeare really had some good
ideas. [laughter]
That guy, dude. That guy. I have to say
I I really
>> underrated.
>> Underrated. I used to think, oh, you
know, he just writer, you know,
[laughter]
>> but then
I think he is actually like a like a
druit, you know. I think
>> I really do. I think he's tapped in to
the unseen because the symbolism, the
archetype that he creates, it's been
used in in in depth psychology, you
know, it's so
re mirroring all the great myth all
around the world. You go, he must
>> must be on his finger on something.
Yeah. Yeah. Um
>> or maybe there were there were mushrooms
growing in [laughter] in
>> Stratford.
That was
>> I mean
>> he was actually just high out of his
>> I got to say some of his plays you
[laughter] think he must be on something
>> um
>> I didn't say that by the way I did not
>> Shakespeare for the record Shakespeare
is not going to have a problem with
>> to suggest William Shakespeare took
mushroom this director of Hamn did not
say that [laughter]
for the record
>> but maybe
um so the the question I want to end on
for this part of the conversation is a
actually I was just I was thinking about
this too in the you know there's this
there was a a German sociologist named
Max Weber um from like the late uh 19th
century early 20th century and he had
this idea that the modern world has
become disenchanted
>> that you know because of
>> science and rationality
>> um that we've lost a sense of
enchantment about the world that that um
>> you know people who lived uh sort of in
a preodern
It was just their birthright was to have
a sense of enchantment about the world,
>> right? Awe.
>> Awe. Yeah. Or, you know, you might you
might uh one might have felt that, you
know, uh spirits were present or ghosts
were present or um and
>> but my my hunch is that you you do
experience enchantment. Is that true?
And also h how might one cultivate a
sense of enchantment?
>> Beautiful question really. Um I I have
[clears throat] deep feelings about that
question and it is
a passion I have now to sort of search
for bringing back some tools of
cultivating that enchantment for
everyone. Everyone should have access to
that. Not just people who are artists or
people who went to school to study and I
I do have to
Plato and Aristotle did great things but
I do have some problems with them as
well.
>> Right. I think they talk
>> hot
>> take [laughter]
>> I think I feel right again I know very
little uh I won't claim I know but my my
instinct
uh makes me feel that they
were great they were students of great
mystics
and then for whatever reason they they
seem to be leaving out of out of the the
mystery part out of a lot other
teachings.
Instead,
they did keep it for themselves, you
know, but
the bedrock of Western civilization
became about rationality
and and reason as opposed to mystery,
you know. So I feel because of that
suddenly only certain people have access
to to the divine to the unseen to the
underworld however you want to name this
realm where great messages comes from
you you shouldn't have to pay money and
buy t-shirts to feel you're connected to
some kind of bigger thing because A pop
star is the only person who has that
connection with with the divine.
Actually you yourself waking up in the
morning has those tools to feel that
kind of aliveness and enchantment. So
then creativity,
imagination and this access to something
beyond became something that only if you
have certain skills to learn in a school
do you have access to. Yeah. And and so
as a result there's a spiritual hunger
in modern
life. Doesn't matter how we have so much
more. And yet there's a deep loneliness
and and and soul level of hunger and
emptiness that I've have felt in my life
and still struggling with. And I think
it's because we we forgot some that we
we have that ability.
>> Chloe, thank you so much for talking
with me today. I really enjoyed it.
[music]
>> I did too. Thank you.
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So, after [music] a few weeks,
Chloe and I spoke again about what she's
learned in death duela training and the
movie that changed how she sees herself.
>> Hello, David.
>> Hi, Chloe. I've been looking forward to
speaking with you again. So, thank you
for for making the time.
>> Of course.
>> I felt like our first conversation kind
of was really uh the energy kept
accumulating. We got uh deeper and
deeper the longer we went. And now that
it's been a little while since we spoke,
it might be a little difficult to uh get
right back into it.
>> Well, well, when we're on set, if that
happens, we we take a minute and we drop
in physically.
>> How do you drop in physically?
[laughter]
>> Yeah. Okay. So,
put put your hand in front of you like
this.
>> Yeah. Yeah, it doesn't have to. You
don't have to lift it all the way up,
but And then just like move towards it
slowly and stop when you can feel the
other hand.
>> Move my hands close together.
>> Yeah. And just very slowly. And then at
some point you're going to feel the
energy of the other hand like there's a
ball in there.
>> Do you feel it?
>> Sure.
>> Yeah. Exactly. It's right there. Close
your eyes.
Yeah. And then can you like let that
energy between your hand just grow a
little bit? You're going to feel that
your palm getting warmer. Move a little
bit like you're you're um forming a
ball.
Yeah. Like Dragon Ball Z. you know,
you're about to fire [laughter]
[gasps]
and then just really, really slowly
bring that energy into your own body,
into your heart.
>> All right.
>> All right. You open your eyes.
[laughter]
>> All right. Let's Let's just do it. Let's
just do it.
>> We're ready.
>> We're ready. So um I I just want to ask
one more question about your adolescence
or your your formative years. And now I
I know the um the director Terrence
Malik was important for you or is
important for you and I I have a
distinct uh memory of being uh 16 years
old and seeing uh Terrence Mallik's Thin
Red Line and then uh Wes Anderson's
Rushmore maybe within the same week when
they came out in the theaters. uh back
then and it was a totally uh
>> mindblowing uh week of movie going for
me were bo both because I didn't really
understand that movies could do what
those two movies did and and also
because I felt like um something about
both those two films in different ways
they they showed me something that I
already understood about myself but
hadn't quite really um been able to
articulate for myself or or seen
depicted in in a film and and um as a
result I I think it really both those
films I can say kind of changed
in some ways changed who who I was at
the time and maybe still now and and I
want to know if you have any similar
experiences with film where where you
saw films and then after seeing them
sort of understood yourself better.
>> What was it like when you said you feel
like it made you understand what the
things that you couldn't quite
>> but what was it?
>> Uh with uh thin red line there was a um
uh sort of a a miss have you you've seen
that movie, right? So it's Yeah, of
course. [laughter]
>> Sorry.
>> So it's a Terrence Malik World War II.
The simplest way of describing it would
be Terrence Malik's World War II. I
think it's one of the greatest war films
ever made. Um and but despite being a
war film or maybe because of being a war
film, the the thing that um sort of
touched me so deeply was that there was
um sort of a a mysticism in that movie
and a a transcendental feeling about the
natural world and and um a transcended
visual poetry to that film that I hadn't
seen in in a movie before that that I
just felt I connected with so deeply.
And then with um with Rushmore there was
a um the the combination of uh of
alienation
and um but alienation combined with just
the the openheartedness of that movie
was something that I I certainly had
been feeling back then and then again
just to see it sort of represented so so
beautifully. Um, yeah,
>> like I said, felt like it made me
understand something about about myself.
>> Oh, that's really beautiful. I think it
was one car way happy together.
>> A beautiful movie.
>> Yeah. and of course Terrence Malik's um
tree of life [music]
and um the new world
but happy together it was when I was
younger and
it's what you describe your your
experience I so I mean that is the
reason why we have art And storytelling
is not trying to teach us something that
we don't know. It's trying to help us
remember
who we are
to bring back bring us back to the
source.
Yeah. So for me that film
made me realize that this
deeply uncomfortable
tension I feel in my body. This yearning
that sometimes feels like it's just
going to consume me.
It is actually
my
[snorts]
this loneliness,
this isolation
that film captured.
on the other side of it is actually my
deep deep yearning for connection
and for relatedness and for love and
that there's nothing
wrong with it. And that film is full of
mystery. So is the thin red line. Yeah.
And that's why when we're going through
our greatest heartbreak and most
difficult time, we look for we don't
look for facts.
We look for poetry because it allows us
to stay in the mystery.
>> Um I have to tell you a quick little
anecdote about uh Tree of Life. Um
that's that's the one that has the the
flashbacks to like the time of
dinosaurs, right?
>> Yeah.
>> So I I saw I remember seeing that movie
in uh at uh the BAM theaters in
Brooklyn, the Brooklyn Academy of Music,
and uh
>> there was an older couple sitting beside
me who I'm sure
bought a ticket for that movie because
they thought it was just a Brad Pitt
movie. They didn't really understand
what they were getting into and they
were they were sort of muttering to each
other the whole time. And and then
there's one scene in that film where
like a a a predator dinosaur sort of
puts
>> uh puts its foot on the chest of a of a
smaller dinosaur,
>> but then lets the smaller dinosaur go
and you're you're
>> because he was already dying. It was
dying. It's like that dinosaur has, you
know, shown an act of mercy. It's like a
pretty wild wild film. And and the lady
beside me just says, "Morris, what is
this movie?" [laughter]
>> Got up and walked out.
>> Oh, that's such a big moment that scene
for me. Yeah,
>> cuz he is he is suggesting that um
grace,
you know, is that is it is the natural
state of the universe and that's what
Terry believes in. I mean, I've seen
that film I don't know how many times as
many times I've seen Happy Together. Um,
yeah, I have never met him,
>> never spoken to him,
>> but on January 1st this year, I got a
phone call from a unknown number. Well,
a a number I don't recognize. Um, I
thought it was the dog workers I was
interviewing.
[laughter and gasps] I said, "Hello."
And then I hear this very soft voice and
goes, "Oh, hello. This is Terrence." Oh
no.
>> I was thinking Terrence which Terrence
for the first 30 seconds I was still
wondering if it was actually him as he's
talking about Hamn.
>> Oh [snorts] what you
>> I can't share that but
>> give me the gist because Terrence Malik
you know famously he doesn't give
interviews. He's sort of I mean as far
as the media is concerned is reclusive.
Yeah, it was surreal to but but I I I I
won't share what he said but I can share
with you. This is something that go back
to the city right line. I said to him
that I feel
um that I come from a lineage that is
found not necessarily like I'm still
trying to get back to the lineage of
storytellers from my own culture from
the Chinese culture. I'm slowly working
my way there. Um but I didn't have
access to that just life circumstances
you know I came to the west [snorts] and
I was even as a storyteller wasn't sure
what's my lineage and so he um his films
allowed me to become a part of a lineage
but I feel that I come from his lineage.
you know, even though he never told me
as a student or he didn't I didn't give
him a choice. I told him, but I've did
it is very significant as a storyteller
because you feel like you belong
somewhere.
>> It's also uh nicer to say I come from
his lineage rather than I rip him off
with all those shots of wind gently
blowing through natural landscape.
>> That Yeah, that's really funny you said
that. I said, "There's a fine line
between what I just said." And I pretty
much copied a lot of yours. [laughter]
He says, "Oh, no, no, that's not um I
know I I have no shame around that. I I
I that in Eternals, the sequence of the
creation of the universe was
very humbly uh inspired by the sequence
vtory of life. you'll see exact shots.
>> There are two ways through life.
Um, you know, you you uh there's
something I I want you to try and help
me uh understand a little bit more about
you where uh you know, you talk about um
sort of your uh [snorts]
desire for uh connection and and uh but
then you you also described yourself as
you know someone who who uh has never
been able to give love fully. Um, a and
I wonder is it that like you're you're
able to express that side of you through
your work but not so much in in life?
Like you don't you don't neither your
work nor nor you seems like someone who
has uh seems like the like their
evidence of someone who has uh a problem
with connection. [laughter]
Oh, you can't judge book by its cover.
[laughter]
No, you Well, thank you. That's really
kind by the way.
But you know, you make the work that you
aspire to be,
>> right? And you you you if you see in
Hamnet, well couldn't express
his grief,
but he could write a play about it,
right? And then create such an intimate
environment for people to grieve
together. But he himself
maybe hoping be through the act of doing
that he himself could grieve and to give
him that moment at the end of the film
is the grace I'm giving to myself say
hey you worked pretty hard too um so
maybe hopefully your work can give it
back to you the
vulnerability that's required to love
fully to be loved loved fully.
>> Um,
>> and and also it also
>> I can see in your eyes the desire to to
figure out like out of care for me as a
human being to figure out
um
a definition so that we can make things
better. you know, like it's and meaning
meaning um if if I could
>> um
I guess what I'm trying to say is
unfortunately
I've learned and I hate that
discovery so much I try to resist it
every day is that we just sort of
wandering between the two extreme
which is to be able to like really um be
in the moment and feel
and then to love without fear and then
total just like annihilation. Just
wanted to completely disappear into the
end of the world where no one can find
me and I start over and I never have to
worry about any of this.
I find myself just pingponging between
the two. And I used to think something's
wrong with that.
But at the end of the midlife crisis, I
feel like I I I I came to the conclusion
at this moment that's actually the
natural state to be in. We just never
been to taught how to ride this wave.
[snorts]
>> Can I say, you know, I I uh because I I
like talking about this kind of stuff. I
feel like I know uh I have a sense of of
what you're talking about, but I could
also very easily imagine somebody
listening to what you're saying and
thinking, "What the hell is she talking
about?" So when
>> the easier version, okay, fine.
[laughter] The easier version is that
the easier version to to digest is is,
you know, in nature everything moves and
that's really scary because we want to
hold on to something. Listen, I'll give
you another fun little adolescence story
since
>> that stuff seems to be interesting to
people is that I was so afraid of
change and the cycle and movement and
being present to to them. I was so
obsessed with Sims, playing Sims.
>> Oh.
so that I would spend hours and hours
and hours and hours
playing Sims so that I could control
these
virtual characters
and [snorts]
even within Sims I couldn't just let
things be like these car I would tab on
it so that they will fall in love and or
they will have this job I would just
control everything with such extreme to
regulate myself. Gosh, I played Sims for
so long, years of my life. [gasps]
>> I'd like to ask also about um the work
that you're doing as a death doula,
which you had had mentioned before.
>> Training
>> training training.
>> Yeah. I have not I have not started
doing that work.
>> So, you're just learning about it.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I finished I completed the
foundational course and then the next
stage would be the diploma and then
during that stage I believe I could
practice but with a mentor. H
>> have you ever been with someone at the
moment of death?
>> Yes.
>> Can you tell me?
>> I have. Yeah. Yeah.
[sighs]
It is
well I I can't tell you in general of
what that is because from what I learned
in training that every experience is
different but
the biggest thing I learned both in that
experience and also in the training is
that it's a solitary experience.
It is the they say, "Oh, well, I'll die
alone." It is true. Even when you're
surrounded by loved ones, it is a very
internal solitary experience just like
birth as you're going through the birth
canal. And when you see that it is a
very individual journey,
then
there is a solace to that. You know, it
made me realize I don't have to
accumulate and try to make life
decisions so that I won't die alone
because it's so scary to die alone. It's
not true.
I know that for a fact, but I don't try
I I'm not telling that to anyone else.
You know, everyone has their own journey
to to get to the But I do not want to
spend my life
preparing for my death.
You know, I want to live
and if that decision led to me being
completely on my own in the moment of
death, I know that won't make a
difference for me in those last moment
than being surrounded by accomplishment,
security, uh loved ones is still going
to be an individual experience. My
experience is that your experience too.
>> That that's also my experience. my uh I
was with my mom when she died and my mom
it was it was interesting because I was
there with uh a couple other close
family members there as well and my mom
wanted us to all be there and just
knowing the type of person who my mom
was. I would have thought that she
wanted us to all maybe have our arms
around her or something like that, but
it was so clear um
sorry it was so clear just in the few
moments before it happened that she she
went somewhere on her own, you know. So,
um I I also uh had had the same have
have witnessed the same sort of thing
that you witnessed.
>> Wow. how special it is that you were
there to be with her in that moment.
>> Yeah. I mean, I certainly don't see life
the same way [laughter] after that. You
know, you learn Exactly.
>> You learn something. You learn
something.
>> Exactly.
>> Um Oh, how do I segue out of that? Let
me let me find Oh, accomplishment.
That's what I was [laughter] going to
talk about
>> that that thing.
>> Yeah. Um but the the thing that I wanted
to ask about um accomplishment is that
um you know you you
earlier when we spoke you know we we
talked and and it was mostly in the
context of you know uh uh Hollywood
awards and things like that. you know,
you you you
touched on things like um
um
you know, like fear of rejection or or
wanting validation from peers and and it
was interesting for me to hear you um
talk about those feelings because purely
from from the outside you're you're
you know an Oscarinning
director uh seemingly in the prime of of
her career. Um and even you have have
those kinds of difficult feelings that
arise from your professional life. Um
and uh I I just wonder is there um
I is there any relationship for you
between
like professional success and personal
satisfaction? Ideally,
ideally
your sense of self-worth is not defined
by how many awards you win [laughter]
[gasps] or how much money your film
makes. Ideally or you know what what the
critics say about your film ideally.
ideally,
>> but
as we have been talking about the
paradox,
but but I'm trying to learn to be more
human, [snorts] you know, because the
reality is you're going to be sort of
dancing between the two. It's like a
wave, right? And then that can happen in
one night when you go to a worst show.
My goodness, it's like the ups and downs
that are going. But imagine if you could
go to those things and actually enjoy
like a surfer every part of the wave
and you actually like can you have
pleasure in losing and and being
criticized and failing. I have been
investigating that because I refuse
because I know I know now at 43 years
old 50% of the time it's going to be
that other side. 50% side is going to be
great. The other 50% is going to be
And I want to find pleasure and
joy and all in the too. So in that
um so I'm working on that.
>> But how how is it going for you? Um
learning to enjoy the
>> I had a lot of you know, in my
life. [laughter] And so I don't call it
I call it like the compost. It's
the same thing.
Um,
but you know, it's not something you can
just say it. You have to learn the
tools. Plenty people are trying to
figure this out because plenty
people come to terms with like, okay,
half of my life is going to be in the
compost and I don't I want to learn how
to compost. I don't want to numb myself
or buy a new bag or take on a job I
don't want, you know, or fall in love
with somebody like I don't actually love
just so that I could avoid the feeling
of sitting in the compost or the
crystas. I want to learn uh how to do it
so I make good life decisions for
myself.
>> Chloe, I I think I've asked [laughter]
you everything I want.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you very much for taking all the
time to speak with me. I appreciate it.
Thank you for being very graceful and
and [music] open.
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro
>> and I'm David Maresy
>> and we're the hosts of the Interview and
audio and video [music] podcast from the
New York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel [music]
so you'll never miss an episode.